In the hall, and so I said, sir, in this series, should I put the comma before the and, or should I leave it out?
He said, Mr. Pierce, does it really matter?
And so I had my rule of thumb from then on, not only for punctuation, but for life.
Does it really matter?
And I used to love to hear him answer the phone.
We had the suites of offices and only one phone in the suite.
And when Dr. Summey would be called to the phone, he would say, Dr. Summey Jr.
speaking, or George Summey Jr.
speaking.
And his father was still alive and in his 90s and would come to visit, people said, with a gold-headed cane and be a very prim and proper man.
And Dr. Summey had learned from him.
That's S-U-M-M-E-Y?
S-U-M-M-E-Y.
Other favorite colleagues in those other favorite colleagues in those early years?
I had a number of office mates over the years.
My first office mate was Colonel Kane, a West Point colonel retired.
I had to do my paper grading and reading.
before eight o'clock and after five, because while I was in the office with Colonel Kane, I got very little done.
He was one of the world's great raconteurs.
He had a fund of anecdotes.
A very charming man, very handsome man, very military man.
If you wanted to send somebody over from Central Casting to be a military colonel, that was Colonel Kane.
At the end of the day, he lived at Maggie Parker's, which was the place for entertaining, and she also had rooms where people lived.
Dr. Mayo later lived there after his mother died.
I lost my train of thought there for a minute.
The favorite colleagues.
Favorite colleagues.
Well, Colonel Cain was, without a doubt, one of the closest people I was to while we were rooming, but at five o'clock, he would go home to tend his garden, as he said, and he was staying at Maggie Parker's, and he would go home to drink.
And that was his occupation where he would go to his wife and drink at Maggie Parker's.
Dr. Summey used to like him very much and admire him, as did everybody that I know of.
He had a favorite lecture on the Sacco-Vanzetti case when we talked to one of the plays around the Sacco-Vanzetti case, and other teachers would ask him to come in and lecture.
Then the Eckfelts, Freddie not only taught me all I knew about grammar and punctuation, but he was a very close friend.
And Hayes, Johnny Hayes and Renee Hayes, who was one of the world's great cooks there.
Johnny, you go by to visit him, and he was always in his den working on the definitive book on Mark Twain.
Nobody was ever allowed to see anything that he wrote on Mark Twain.
After he died, two of his colleagues finished up the book on Mark Twain, and I imagine it came out as a vanity publication because I don't think there was much there.
Johnny was one of the most charming men I ever met.
Delightful to know.
I had a wonderful sense of humor, very bright, very handsome man.
And Renee was very darkly attractive and, as I said, a wonderful cook.
As you're getting started as a junior member of the faculty, did anyone, the department head or anyone else, give you any guidelines, any advice, any counsel?
Well, yes, Dr. Mayo said check your mailbox twice a day.
That was guidelines.
And you understood that you should not drink on campus.
We had Vanden Bark, who had written a book on slang that was definitive at the time, was fired because he had this big black Lincoln and he picked up students.
Hitchhiking was the thing to do in those days.
And so he had picked up a student who had a sack in town and they brought him back and stopped at the campus barracks.
and let the student out.
As the student was getting out, he said, would you like a glass of beer or a bottle of beer, Dr. VandenBark?
He said, don't mind if I do.
So the two sat there drinking beer.
And one of the campus security officers came up and stopped him and confiscated the beer.
And Vandenbark gave a wrong name, but everybody recognized this big black Lincoln.
It was like a hearse.
And so he was fired for drinking on campus.
What about dress?
What were the obvious guidelines?
Well, the obvious guidelines were you wore a coat, usually a suit, and a tie.
And that got to be my uniform for years.
I felt undressed if I didn't have a coat and a tie on.
And you were to be on campus how long?
Well, you were normally supposed to be there during the eight-hour day, although some people didn't follow that rule.
They never really checked up on you that I know of, but some of your colleagues did.
We had one colleague who would go and report if somebody was not in his office or hadn't been around, but.
Were there many smokers?
Oh, it was, yeah, there was quite a few people who smoked.
Did they smoke in their office?
Oh, yes.
And how long did it take for you to get an office over on the, in the academic building with the rest of the family?
Well, it, it, we finally, it didn't take long, very long, before I actually had a office on the first floor of the academic building.
They gave us, gave us a group of suites down there.
Now, the department head when you arrived was— Dr. Thomas F. Mayo, who had been—who had two claims to fame.
One, he had taught Faulkner in high school in Oxford, Mississippi.
Did he ever mention that?
Oh, yes.
He was a Rhodes Scholar.
Dr. Mayo was a Rhodes Scholar.
He came to A&M on joint appointment as head librarian and a professor of English.
Then when Gib Gilchrist, who was then the dean of engineering, brought in the engineer's library,
There was a power struggle between Mayo and Dean Gilchrist as to who was over the engineer's library.
And so then Gib Gilchrist was made president.
And one of the first things he did, Dr. Summey having come to the point of retirement,
was to make Dr. Mayo full-time head of the English department and hire a new librarian so that there was no question of who was in charge of the engineer's library.
Now that had all occurred before you got back.
That had all occurred before I came here, and Louie Hauer used to joke saying that Dr. Summey ought to pay
All of these people, for all of the coffee they had bought him, different people like Dr. Koffer, and that was an honorary title.
Everybody was a doctor, whether you had the terminal degree or not.
Everybody, you were just automatically doctor.
To this day, I'm called doctor and have it done by people, and I've finally given up on correcting them.
Describe Dr. Mayo as a person.
Well, he was a delightful man.
He was extremely well read.
And my first memory of him other than meeting him and telling me this corner of the desk is yours, as he was walking down the hall in the academic building and he seemed to be in a hurry, I said, Dr. Mayo, where are you going?
He said, I'm off to
teach this gun for hire to the ladies of the social club."
He said, it's Graham Greene's wonderful mystery story, this gun for hire.
I thought that was an amazing thing for a man who was noted for literature and all to teach.
And he never saw a movie that he didn't like no matter how bad it was.
The manager of the theater, local movie theater, had a chance to bring the Texas first showing of Orson Welles Macbeth to A&M.
And so he invited the English department to see a preview of it.
because it had mixed reviews, and he wanted to know whether he wanted to have the premiere performance or not.
So we all went and saw Orson Welles' Macbeth, and most of us thought it was horrible.
and so when we went out the manager was buttonholing some of us and he had Dr. Mayo and Johnny Hayes and myself talking and Johnny and I were saying what a bad movie it was and Dr. Mayo was saying how wonderful it was and just then Dr. Summey came slowly walking up
the aisle and the manager said, Dr. Summey, Dr. Summey, how did you like it?
Dr. Summey never broke step, but he passed by.
He said, I don't know what it was, but it wasn't Shakespeare.
Dr. Mayo kept on talking and talking about it.
I knew that the argument was settled right then and there.
The moment Dr. Summey said, I don't know what it was, but it wasn't Shakespeare, that settled it for the manager, and so we did not have the premiere of Macbeth.
Describe Dr. Mayo physically.
What did he—big?
No, he was—I would say about a 5'10", very kindly expression, very kind man, very— Well-dressed?
He was usually in a sort of tan suit or a brown suit, and he lived with his mother, and she and the maid, black maid, both ruled him, and he was definitely under their thumb.
But then after his mother died, he pensioned off the black woman, and he went to live at Miss Maggie's, which was the big—I forget what they call it—the Knoll or something like that, the Oaks in town, in Bryan.
And he always gave—
He was always entertained and played a lot of bridge.
Once a year, he repaid all of the invitations he'd had over the year by giving a wonderful dinner, sort of buffet-style dinner party at Maggie Parker's, where he lived.
One of my favorite stories about today, he looked out the window and saw this wonderful party on the lawn that she catered, Miss Maggie catered, and Rosa, the Mexican woman who worked for her, passed by his room and the door was open.
He said, Rosa, whose party is that?
She says, It's yours, Dr. Mayo.
And he'd forgotten all that.
Because in the interview with Sterling Evans, I asked him what led him to be so supportive of the A&M Library and so generous.
And quickly he said, because under Tommy Mayo, the A&M Library was such a pleasant place for a shy country boy.
And see, he was here in the teens.
Yeah.
But Dr. Mayo already
Was he a congenial colleague?
Oh, very congenial.
One of the most congenial people I ever knew.
I once accused him of being a dog hater.
He said, no.
I said, I don't hate dogs.
He said, I hate dog lovers.
All right.
What were some of the things you learned about teaching those first years?
Well, as I said, I learned a great deal from Fred Eckfeldt.
He was a man that if I had a question, I'd say, here's a question about punctuation.
Well, he would take down any book at random, open it to any page at random, run his finger down it until he found an example of it.
Then he would show it to me.
He would explain it, my question, and then he would ask me to repeat it.
And my own words.
And once he was satisfied that I, if he wasn't satisfied with my answer, he would go over it again with me in a different way.
And that's how I learned.
And other than that, I was self-taught.
And describe a typical, your routine of a typical class day.
What time did you get to the campus and what did you do when?
Well, I usually got to the campus at the start by,
I was living on the campus of course and it was just in a sense about half a block from the YMCA to the academic building and so I would have breakfast at Cebiza or Aggieland Inn or one of the drugstores or there was under the YMCA
I may have said I lived at the Aggieland Inn.
That's wrong.
YMCA.
Under the YMCA was a coffee shop and a billiard parlor and also a barber shop.
Were there any chairs in that little coffee shop?
Oh, yeah.
Chairs in there with stools.
Casey's?
Casey's.
That was Casey's.
And so I often ate it there early in the morning, just grab a bite, go over to the office.
And I usually got there between 7.15 to 7.30.
I usually had eight o'clock across the board, being early morning people.
And even after I got to be director of scheduling, I scheduled my classes eight o'clock across the board and gave myself all morning classes.
I had been assigned one one o'clock class, and it was
the logic class, my first teaching of it, and half the students fell asleep and I was ready to join them.
By the time the semester was over, one student, a Filipino, came to me and told me, Mr. Pierce, what a wonderful class it was and how much he had enjoyed it.
I said, you are the only one.
You are the only one, because I couldn't say as much.
But I never had an afternoon class after that, if I could help it.
Now, these classes were 25, 30 students each?
Yes, except for later on in speech, we got 20 with that.
And in technical writing, we got, I think, 20.
In the afternoons, what did you do in the afternoon?
Well, normally I either read the papers.
When I wasn't around Colonel Cain, if he was off in class, I'd read the papers.
I studied, read, went to the library.
I did a lot of writing of my own, creative writing.
At one time, Fred Eckfeldt and I had about 90 percent of the publications
Not Fred Eckfeld, but I mean Harry Kidd and I had about 90 percent of the publications in the department.
And when I applied for a grant for summer one time, one of the vice presidents of the college turned me down.
He said, this man's publications are just stories.
And I thought, my God, as an English teacher, it's all right to teach stories, but it's not all right to write them.
And Harry got very little respect from his colleagues, too, because we wrote.
One of my colleagues and a very dear friend said, but Frank, you get paid for these stories.
And I thought that was the highest compliment you could get is somebody was willing to give you money for them.
In general, where were they being published?
What publications?
Well, at one time, my first publication was with Playboy, and I had discovered a mimeographed legal opinion
that had been given by an attorney general of the state of Texas when a farmer's bull had leapt the fence and mated with some of the cows that were in an extension service
experiment and loused up a breeding program and all.
And so in their anger, the people at the Extension Service had castrated the bull and the bull had died.
And the farmer had demanded repayment and they had paid him twenty dollars out of local funds.
And then they tried to get the state to reimburse them for the local funds.
And this attorney general had written the opinion that, you know, a very witty and amusing opinion about this proletarian bull wanting to beat the
bells of high society and so on, and they carried on at great length and denying the payment.
And so I had taken this and, like most jokes, he'd carried it too far, and I'd cut it and toned down some of the language and submitted it to
Playboy, and they bought it.
And they changed the title to what I thought was the most wonderful title in the world, about this castrated bull.
They called it How Now, Brown Cow.
And I was also writing for the men's magazines and mystery.
Most of my stories have been in the mystery field, but when I started teaching creative writing,
I tried to write every kind of thing, and so I published and all sorts of things.
I had many pedagogical articles in English in Texas, had some scholarly articles in SMLA journals and in College English Association, like that.
And you composed these on the typewriter or in longhand?
Both, both.
I tried to teach my students the fact that if you write something in longhand, it's not as easy to read as it is when it's typed.
And I said, many times, if you write something on a typewriter, the teacher or the reader will miss mistakes because he's reading it more rapidly, whereas he's reading more slowly because you're handwriting.
Why?
The mistakes leap out from the page at the teacher.
So I said, type when you can for your own sake.
And then it always seemed to me that there was a different story when you wrote it in longhand and then typed it and then saw it on the printed page because it ended up being three different stories in effect by the rate of reading that you had.
And I always said if you write a story
and you have a hundred readers, there are 101 stories.
There's a story that you wrote and a hundred different stories that your readers write because each reader brings something of himself and past experience and interests, prejudices to the story.
Back to your normal routine schedule, so you're working all afternoon, you would
quit about 5 o'clock, 5 o'clock?
Usually about 5, sometimes later.
And then eat, and what about what in the evenings?
What did you do before you got married?
Well, sometimes I went to movies.
I went to performances at Guyon Hall, which was a very handsome building that I
Hated to see Torn Down.
Do you remember some, that guy and do you remember some famous performers?
Well, they had, I remember Andrew, I think Andrew Previn, Andrew Previn came one time.
We had a symphony orchestra and
But I don't, other than symphonies and their plays and things like that, I try to pre-opage, you know, types of performance that I don't really recall offhand any of them.
Where did you and your buddies, if you were going to relax on a Friday night or a Saturday night, where did you go?
Well, we usually went out to a restaurant for a meal and maybe to a show.
Even after I married one of the big things was on Saturday night we'd drive down to Bryan Main Street and park and watch people go by.
That's not much activity though.
There wasn't all that much activity unless you went to some kind of performance on campus or you listened a lot to radio.
What was the most upscale place to eat then?
There wasn't any.
Upscale place.
I think Miss Maggie's dinners, Maggie Parker's dinners, was about as upscale as you could get when you went to the Oaks.
Now that's the boarding house in Bryan.
That was the boarding house called, I think at the Oaks it was called.
And then there were Hotarge was well known.
It was a cafeteria.
And I think one of the buildings out at the school is named Hotards, one of the dormitories.
And he had four sons now.
But that was the place to eat and you would go downtown and eat and you'd go to a show and there really wasn't much to do unless you played bridge or something like that.
There was an awful lot of bridge playing.
Now one time Fred Benson told me that one of the unwritten rules that he and his friends followed was that if they were playing any games of chance for money that they closed the blinds and that they never, ever, ever served any alcohol if a student was present.
Did you ever hear anything like that?
Well, you didn't drink with your students and you, of course, weren't to be caught sexually with your students, but that happened, too, any number of times.
Going to the movie theater at Guyon and at the campus theater, the Aggie students would make a lot of noise, wouldn't they, sometimes?
Well, there was always, even downtown theaters, anywhere you went.
Oh, did they downtown too?
Yeah.
There was always a certain amount of noise, but I didn't think it was bad.
It didn't bother me anyhow.
In those first year or two of your teaching, did Dr. Mayo give you any evaluation?
Did he call you in and tell you how you were doing and how to?
No.
When I first came here, you taught your classes.
You checked your mailbox.
And you did not fraternize outside of the school with your students.
And you did not drink on campus, but those are about the
Only things that I ever recall.
Finally we got into evaluations and some of the written, you had this scale one time I remember from one to ten.
One being low and ten being high.
I remember this one class in creative writing where somebody went down the margin and marked me more than ten.
And another student in the same class went down the margin and marked me less than one.
So it was mainly how you struck the students and they were allowed to write comments and the comments were so violent in some cases that the secretary finally refused to type up the comments and so the dean ended typing and the liberal arts ended up typing the comments.
Now who was the dean in those first years?
Well Dean Brooks was the first one I remember.
And he was a very state man.
I remember when, I guess, Bolton was vice president.
And Bolton gave a talk and said, if you didn't get a raise, ask yourself if you merited a raise.
The whole thing was very snide and I objected to it, so I wrote a letter to Dean Brooks objecting to Bolton's remarks and the way he had put them.
I got a note back from Dean Brooks, in effect, saying this letter is going to be kept in your file and held against you, and the next year Bolton was president.
I made my mark at A&M very early on.
I got known.
I attended my first liberal arts faculty meeting and I was not dressed as appropriately.
I was more in a sporty outfit and everybody else was more stained because I didn't have too many different clothes right at the start.
And so I wore a lot of sports clothes, even though they were a little bit frowned on.
Nobody ever said anything.
And at this meeting, they gave the Summey report on the Benny report.
And I forget what it was all about, but this motion that we do something.
And obviously, nobody wanted to do it.